docs/infrastructure/benchmarks.md, before:

# Benchmarks

In this document, we describe the benchmark types used for the runtime - Engine
micro benchmarks in the section
[Engine JMH microbenchmarks](#engine-jmh-microbenchmarks) and standard library
benchmarks in the section
[Standard library benchmarks](#standard-library-benchmarks), and how and where
are the results stored and visualized in the section
[Visualization](#visualization).

To track the performance of the engine, we use
[JMH](https://openjdk.org/projects/code-tools/jmh/). There are two types of
benchmarks:

- [micro benchmarks](#engine-jmh-microbenchmarks) located directly in the
  `runtime-benchmarks` SBT project. These benchmarks are written in Java, and
  are used to measure the performance of specific parts of the engine.
- [standard library benchmarks](#standard-library-benchmarks) located in the
  `test/Benchmarks` Enso project. These benchmarks are entirely written in Enso,
  along with the harness code.

## Engine JMH microbenchmarks

These benchmarks are written in Java and are used to measure the performance of
specific parts of the engine. The sources are located in the
`runtime-benchmarks` SBT project, under `engine/runtime-benchmarks` directory.

### Running the benchmarks

To run the benchmarks, use `bench` or `benchOnly` command in the
`runtime-benchmarks` project - `bench` runs all the benchmarks and `benchOnly`
runs only one benchmark specified with the fully qualified name. The
aforementioned commands are mere shortcuts to the
[standard JMH launcher](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/Main.java).
To get the full power of the JMH launcher, invoke simply `run` with cmdline
options passed to the launcher. For the full options summary, see the
[JMH source code](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/runner/options/CommandLineOptions.java),
or invoke `run -h`.

You can change the parameters to the benchmarks either by modifying the
annotations directly in the source code, or by passing the parameters to the JMH
runner. For example, to run the benchmarks with 3 warmup iterations and 2
measurement iterations, use:

```
sbt:runtime-benchmarks> run -w 3 -i 2 <bench-name>
```

### Debugging the benchmarks

Currently, the best way to debug the benchmark is to set the `@Fork` annotation
to 0, and to run `withDebug` command like this:

```
withDebug --debugger benchOnly -- <fully qualified benchmark name>
```

Another option that does not require changing the source code is to run
something like

```
sbt:runtime-benchmarks> run -w 1 -i 1 -f 1 -jvmArgs -agentlib:jdwp=transport=dt_socket,server=y,suspend=y,address=localhost:8000 org.enso.compiler.benchmarks.module.ImportStandardLibrariesBenchmark.importStandardLibraries
```

This command will run the `importStandardLibraries` benchmark in fork waiting
for the debugger to attach.

## Standard library benchmarks

Unlike the Engine micro benchmarks, these benchmarks are written entirely in
Enso and located in the `test/Benchmarks` Enso project. There are two ways to
run these benchmarks:

- [Running standalone](#running-standalone)
- [Running via JMH launcher](#running-via-jmh-launcher)

Note that to avoid inflating the run-time of the std-lib benchmarks on the CI,
some extra benchmarks (which are not measuring important functionality, but may
serve as a baseline when trying to understand performance of similar scenarios)
are disabled by default. To enable them, set the `ENSO_ENABLE_EXTRA_BENCHMARKS`
environment variable before running any benchmarks.

### Running standalone

There is a universal launcher that enlists and executes all available benchmarks
in `test/Benchmarks` project. Run it with

```bash
enso$ runEngineDistribution --run test/Benchmarks
```

command. The launcher accepts additional `filter` argument which allows one to
select a benchmark of one's choice by checking for substrings in group or
benchmark name. For example:

```bash
enso$ runEngineDistribution --run test/Benchmarks New_Vector
```

runs all the benchmarks that have `New_Vector` in their name.

The harness within the project is not meant for any sophisticated benchmarking,
but rather for quick local evaluation. See the `Bench.measure` method
documentation for more details. For more sophisticated approach, run the
benchmarks via the JMH launcher.

### Running via JMH launcher

The JMH launcher is located in `std-bits/benchmarks` directory, as
`std-benchmarks` SBT project. It is a single Java class with a `main` method
that just delegates to the
[standard JMH launcher](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/Main.java),
therefore, supports all the command line options as the standard launcher. For
the full options summary, either see the
[JMH source code](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/runner/options/CommandLineOptions.java),
or run the launcher with `-h` option.

The `std-benchmarks` SBT project supports `bench` and `benchOnly` commands, that
work the same as in the `runtime-benchmarks` project, with the exception that
the benchmark name does not have to be specified as a fully qualified name, but
as a regular expression. To access the full flexibility of the JMH launcher, run
it via `Bench/run` - for example, to see the help message: `Bench/run -h`. For
example, you can run all the benchmarks that have "New_Vector" in their name
with just 3 seconds for warmup iterations and 2 measurement iterations with
`Bench/run -w 3 -i 2 New_Vector`.

Whenever you add or delete any benchmarks from `test/Benchmarks` project, the
generated JMH sources need to be recompiled with `Bench/clean; Bench/compile`.
You do not need to recompile the `std-benchmarks` project if you only modify the
benchmark sources.

## Visualization

The benchmarks are invoked as a daily
[GitHub Action](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/actions/workflows/benchmark.yml),
that can be invoked manually on a specific branch as well. The results are kept
in the artifacts produced from the actions. In
`tools/performance/engine-benchmarks` directory, there is a simple Python script
for collecting and processing the results. See the
[README in that directory](../../tools/performance/engine-benchmarks/README.md)
for more information about how to run that script. This script is invoked
regularly on a private machine and the results are published in
[https://enso-org.github.io/engine-benchmark-results/](https://enso-org.github.io/engine-benchmark-results/).

Commit message:

Add docs for tracing compilation for runtime-benchmarks

docs/infrastructure/benchmarks.md, after:

# Benchmarks

In this document, we describe the benchmark types used for the runtime - Engine
micro benchmarks in the section
[Engine JMH microbenchmarks](#engine-jmh-microbenchmarks) and standard library
benchmarks in the section
[Standard library benchmarks](#standard-library-benchmarks), and how and where
are the results stored and visualized in the section
[Visualization](#visualization).

To track the performance of the engine, we use
[JMH](https://openjdk.org/projects/code-tools/jmh/). There are two types of
benchmarks:

- [micro benchmarks](#engine-jmh-microbenchmarks) located directly in the
  `runtime-benchmarks` SBT project. These benchmarks are written in Java, and
  are used to measure the performance of specific parts of the engine.
- [standard library benchmarks](#standard-library-benchmarks) located in the
  `test/Benchmarks` Enso project. These benchmarks are entirely written in Enso,
  along with the harness code.

## Engine JMH microbenchmarks

These benchmarks are written in Java and are used to measure the performance of
specific parts of the engine. The sources are located in the
`runtime-benchmarks` SBT project, under `engine/runtime-benchmarks` directory.

### Running the benchmarks

To run the benchmarks, use `bench` or `benchOnly` command in the
`runtime-benchmarks` project - `bench` runs all the benchmarks and `benchOnly`
runs only one benchmark specified with the fully qualified name. The
aforementioned commands are mere shortcuts to the
[standard JMH launcher](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/Main.java).
To get the full power of the JMH launcher, invoke simply `run` with cmdline
options passed to the launcher. For the full options summary, see the
[JMH source code](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/runner/options/CommandLineOptions.java),
or invoke `run -h`.

You can change the parameters to the benchmarks either by modifying the
annotations directly in the source code, or by passing the parameters to the JMH
runner. For example, to run the benchmarks with 3 warmup iterations and 2
measurement iterations, use:

```
sbt:runtime-benchmarks> run -w 3 -i 2 <bench-name>
```

### Debugging the benchmarks

Currently, the best way to debug the benchmark is to set the `@Fork` annotation
to 0, and to run `withDebug` command like this:

```
withDebug --debugger benchOnly -- <fully qualified benchmark name>
```

Another option that does not require changing the source code is to run
something like

```
sbt:runtime-benchmarks> run -w 1 -i 1 -f 1 -jvmArgs -agentlib:jdwp=transport=dt_socket,server=y,suspend=y,address=localhost:8000 org.enso.compiler.benchmarks.module.ImportStandardLibrariesBenchmark.importStandardLibraries
```

This command will run the `importStandardLibraries` benchmark in fork waiting
for the debugger to attach.

### Dumping the compilation info of the benchmark

The following command enables the compilation tracing output from the Truffle
compiler:

```
sbt:runtime-benchmarks> run -jvmArgs -Dpolyglot.engine.TraceCompilation=true org.enso.interpreter.bench.benchmarks.semantic.IfVsCaseBenchmarks.ifBench6In
```

The output will contain lines like:

```
[error] [engine] opt done   id=1067  ifBench6In.My_Type.Value                           |Tier 2|Time    22(  18+4   )ms|AST    1|Inlined   0Y   0N|IR     17/    20|CodeSize     186|Addr 0x7acf0380f280|Timestamp 96474787822678|Src n/a
```

You can, e.g., dump Graal graphs with:

```
sbt:runtime-benchmarks> run -jvmArgs -Dgraal.Dump=Truffle:2 org.enso.interpreter.bench.benchmarks.semantic.IfVsCaseBenchmarks.ifBench6In
```

## Standard library benchmarks

Unlike the Engine micro benchmarks, these benchmarks are written entirely in
Enso and located in the `test/Benchmarks` Enso project. There are two ways to
run these benchmarks:

- [Running standalone](#running-standalone)
- [Running via JMH launcher](#running-via-jmh-launcher)

Note that to avoid inflating the run-time of the std-lib benchmarks on the CI,
some extra benchmarks (which are not measuring important functionality, but may
serve as a baseline when trying to understand performance of similar scenarios)
are disabled by default. To enable them, set the `ENSO_ENABLE_EXTRA_BENCHMARKS`
environment variable before running any benchmarks.

### Running standalone

There is a universal launcher that enlists and executes all available benchmarks
in `test/Benchmarks` project. Run it with

```bash
enso$ runEngineDistribution --run test/Benchmarks
```

command. The launcher accepts additional `filter` argument which allows one to
select a benchmark of one's choice by checking for substrings in group or
benchmark name. For example:

```bash
enso$ runEngineDistribution --run test/Benchmarks New_Vector
```

runs all the benchmarks that have `New_Vector` in their name.

The harness within the project is not meant for any sophisticated benchmarking,
but rather for quick local evaluation. See the `Bench.measure` method
documentation for more details. For more sophisticated approach, run the
benchmarks via the JMH launcher.

### Running via JMH launcher

The JMH launcher is located in `std-bits/benchmarks` directory, as
`std-benchmarks` SBT project. It is a single Java class with a `main` method
that just delegates to the
[standard JMH launcher](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/Main.java),
therefore, supports all the command line options as the standard launcher. For
the full options summary, either see the
[JMH source code](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/runner/options/CommandLineOptions.java),
or run the launcher with `-h` option.

The `std-benchmarks` SBT project supports `bench` and `benchOnly` commands, that
work the same as in the `runtime-benchmarks` project, with the exception that
the benchmark name does not have to be specified as a fully qualified name, but
as a regular expression. To access the full flexibility of the JMH launcher, run
it via `Bench/run` - for example, to see the help message: `Bench/run -h`. For
example, you can run all the benchmarks that have "New_Vector" in their name
with just 3 seconds for warmup iterations and 2 measurement iterations with
`Bench/run -w 3 -i 2 New_Vector`.

Whenever you add or delete any benchmarks from `test/Benchmarks` project, the
generated JMH sources need to be recompiled with `Bench/clean; Bench/compile`.
You do not need to recompile the `std-benchmarks` project if you only modify the
benchmark sources.

## Visualization

The benchmarks are invoked as a daily
[GitHub Action](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/actions/workflows/benchmark.yml),
that can be invoked manually on a specific branch as well. The results are kept
in the artifacts produced from the actions. In
`tools/performance/engine-benchmarks` directory, there is a simple Python script
for collecting and processing the results. See the
[README in that directory](../../tools/performance/engine-benchmarks/README.md)
for more information about how to run that script. This script is invoked
regularly on a private machine and the results are published in
[https://enso-org.github.io/engine-benchmark-results/](https://enso-org.github.io/engine-benchmark-results/).
